 Light has long captured the fascination of humankind
 and although we take phenomena such as reflection,
 refraction, diffraction and interference for
 granted, it is not hard to see why they posed 
 perplexing problems throughout most of history. 
 Why should light bend upon entering water? Why does
 light spread out after passing through a narrow gap?
 How does light travel to us from the sun, through 
 the void of space? These sorts of questions have 
 ensured that optics has a long and engaging history;
 mirrors were known to the ancients, eyeglasses were
 known by the thirteenth century, and, of course,
 the telescope was invented by Galileo around 1608.
 The law of refraction was discovered by Willebrord
 Snell in 1621 and the phenomenon of diffraction was
 observed by both Francesco Maria Grimaldi and 
 Robert Hooke by the mid-1600s. Sir Isaac Newton 
 made great contributions to optics, proposing that
 'white light' was a combination of all colors, and
 formulating a particle, or corpuscular, theory of
 light. At roughly the same time (the latter half of
 the seventeenth century), the Dutch physicist 
 Christian Huygens proposed a powerful wave theory 
 of light. As we shall discover, most of the history
 of optics is dominated by the debate over the nature
 of light: is light a particle or a wave, or is it
 something in between (a wavicle?)?Another important
 figure in the history of optics is Thomas Young,
 an Englishman who revived the wave theory at the 
 beginning of the nineteenth century by adding to 
 it the principle of superposition. The French 
 scientist Augustin Jean Fresnel, also an advocate of
 the wave theory, proposed a mechanistic description 
 of light on the basis of it being a transverse 
 oscillation through the ether, rather than a 
 longitudinal one as had previously been assumed.
 The corpuscular theory seemed in very bad shape 
 indeed. By 1845 Michael Faraday had performed several
 experiments showing that the plane of polarization 
 could be altered by magnetic fields. This ultimately 
 led to James Clerk Maxwell's brilliant unification of 
 optics and electromagnetism, when his wave equations 
 predicted that the speed of light should be 1/, which
 was remarkably close to the experimental value.
 Light, then, was an electromagnetic disturbance
 propagating through the ether.As a wave, however, 
 light must have a medium through which to propagate.
 Towards the end of the nineteenth century this 
 medium, called the ether, became increasingly 
 problematic; experiments by Michelson and Morley 
 in particular could detect no motion of the ether 
 relative to the earth. Such considerations led to 
 Einstein's theory of special relativity and to the 
 discarding of the idea of the ether altogether. 
 Moreover, as the twentieth century progressed,
 quantum mechanics showed that all particles have 
 a wavelike property; the distinction between waves
 and particles became less and less clear.
 In this guide we will treat light usually as a wave,
 but sometimes as a particle, and as a general rule 
 it is both or either. First, we will examine light 
 as a wave, the relationship between light and 
 electromagnetism, and gain some insight into how
 light interacts with matter. In the second topic, 
 we will apply the laws of reflection and refraction
 to geometric optics. Finally, we will consider the 
 important phenomena of interference, diffraction,
 and polarization. 